# What is AliGator?

It's an automatic generator of puns based on French names: the **GATOR** family has a child, what's the child's name? **Ali**, because : **aligator**. 

# Why this project?

Wordplays are not often well handed by generative artificial intelligences, even less so when based on phonetic similarities. AliGator proposes to automatically generate puns based on names, without using a joke database. 

In addition to automatic generation, one of the aims of this project is to create a manually annotated resource of automatically generated puns. To this end, an annotation campaign (for example) is being considered. In the meantime, the website allows users to provide a feedback for each pun proposed by AliGator in order to help us to improve this tool. This feedback is similar to the functions that will be available for the annotation task afterwards. This concerns, for example, the level of humor of the puns, the semantic aspect (does it make sense?) or whether it's shocking or explicit. It is also possible to leave a comment explaining the feedback. 

# How does it work?

## Version currently deployed on the website (AliGator V1.1)

This first version (AliGator 1.0. : 20/06/2023) of the generator is based on phonetic criteria to automatically generate puns. The [list of French terms from the English Wiktionary](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Category:French_terms_with_IPA_pronunciation) and their pronunciation(s) (in IPA, the International Phonetic Alphabet) are used to align with a [list of French names](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Category:French_given_names) and their pronunciation(s), also taken from the Wiktionary (this list of names is progressively enriched according to the shortcomings reported by feedbacks). Alignments are made using _tries_ (prefix trees) to find the terms whose pronunciation is aligned with that of a name. To display the puns, AliGator identifies and shows the names whose pronunciation in French matches the rest of the term. To achieve this, we applied a list of rules that generate surnames with different levels of complexity. AliGator randomly displays one of the less complex surnames.

This website offers one main feature ([firstname choice](./prenom.html)): the user can enter a first name and ask AliGator to generate puns containing that name (we only display 5 of them, for further annotation). If the proposed first name doesn't exist in our database, the user can add it in IPA with its spelling variant, and thus obtain any puns that contain this name. 

Two more playful features are also been designed. The first, [random generation](./lea-toire.html)  of puns is available. The second, [the top 5](./top-5.html) of the funniest jokes, will only be available when we have enough feedbacks.

AliGator 1.1. only displays lemmas. 

AliGator is also downloadable at the following address : [https://github.com/MathieuDehouck/AliGator](https://github.com/MathieuDehouck/AliGator).

##Next version, not deployed on the website (AliGator V2)

This project is still under development. For the next version, AliGator 2.0., the following functions are already implemented but not yet available on this website or GitHub. The [https://repository.ortolang.fr/api/content/morphalou/2/LISEZ_MOI.html](Morphalou lexicon) will be used as a resource for terms (XSAMPA pronunciation) and morphological informations. In this version, the puns will no longer simply concern a single lemma, but will form morphosyntactic patterns (such as _determiner_ _noun_ _adjective_) that respect gender and number agreement rules (using information from Morphalou).

In the longer term, we plan to generate puns based on several firts names, such as: Anna, Lise, Mehdi CALE (in French: _analyses médicales_ for "mecical analyses"). We then plan to release the pronunciation constraints to produce puns such as: Gordon ZOLA. Finally, we are planning an automatic learning stage to provide word sets without having to manually enter morphosyntactic patterns.

# Who created AliGator?

[Mathieu Dehouck](https://www.lattice.cnrs.fr/membres/chercheurs-ou-enseignants-chercheurs/mathieu-dehouck/), researcher at the Lattice-CNRS laboratory (UMR 8094).

[Marine Delaborde](https://www.cyu.fr/marine-delaborde), tenure track at the LT2D laboratory (EA 7518) at CY Cergy Paris Université.

By following these links on our names, you will access the necessary information to contact us if needed.

# Disclaimers

The puns are produced automatically, without any filter. This means puns generated by AliGator may offend some people's sensibilities. When generating puns from first name, you can indicate sensitive or explicit content in the feedback.

Some phonetic transcription errors may come from the database used as a resource (Wiktionary or Morphalou, depending of the version). You can indicate them to us in the feedback so that we can correct them in our internal database.

# Your data

We don't collect your personal data, but any feedback you leave will be stored anonymously on a CNRS server (so we can't rectify a feedback _a posteriori_).

# Licenses
## Website

The AliGator 1.0. API website (hereinafter referred to as the Website) edited by Mathieu Dehouck and Marine Delaborde is hosted by the CNRS at the following address: [https://apps.lattice.cnrs.fr/aligator/main.html](https://apps.lattice.cnrs.fr/aligator/main.html).

### Intellectual property

The content, texts, including videos, trademarks, logos and images that appear or are available on the Website are protected by intellectual property law. As such, you agree not to use, extract, copy, translate, reproduce, sell, publish, exploit or distribute any content of the Website protected by intellectual property rights, without the prior written authorization of the authors. 

### Hypertexts links
 
The reproduction of a link from this Website to a site published by a third party in no way consitutes validation of this site or its content by the CNRS. CNRS shall not be held responsible for the content of any site published by a third party to which links are established, or for any other information published on this Website, nor for the consequences of their use. The creation of hypertext links by third parties to pages or documents published on the CNRS site is authorized provided that the link do not infringe the interests of the CNRS and that they guarantee the possibility for the user to identify the origin and author of the document. It is specified that the establishment of such hypertext links for the purpose of commercial promotion of products or services offered by a third party is prohibited. 


## Code and resources

### Code

The code for the application AliGator 1.1. is available on Github at the following address: [https://github.com/MathieuDehouck/Aligator](https://github.com/MathieuDehouck/Aligator). This code is licensed under MIT license (see LICENSE-CODE.md file). 


### Resources 
The code has been designed to use external resources for terms and names and their pronunciation(s): see README.md for details. These resources are not directly integrated into the publicly available code on Github, but apart from it. 

The AliGator 1.0. code uses the Wiktionary as an external resource for the terms, names and their pronunciation(s). We've made a few modifications to this resource. The GitHub repository contains the original resource and the modified resource. Both files are licensed under CC-BY-SA. The puns produced by Aligator 1.1. are licensed under CC-BY-SA (see LICENSE-WIKTIONNAIRE.md file). 

The AliGator 2.0. code will use the Morphalou lexicon as an external resource for the terms and their pronunciation(s). We've made a few modifications to this resource. The GitHub repository will contain both the original and the modified resource. Both files are licensed under the LGPL for Linguistic Resources (LGPLLR). It will also use the Wiktionary as an external resource for the names and their pronunciation(s). As with Aligator 1.1., we've made a few modifications to this resource. The GitHub repository will contain both the original and the modified resource. Both files are licensed under LGPLLR (see LICENSE-MORPHALOU.md file). The puns produced by Aligator 2.0. are licensed under CC-BY-SA.
